
AN INVESTIGATION INTO THE FEASIBILITY OF A USER FRIENDLY EEG BASED
HUMAN-MACHINE INTERFACE FOR CHRONIC USE

Research proposal: MEng

Thys Meintjes	
9233091

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
University of Pretoria


Prof. P.J Cilliers
		
(Signature) 
M.J Meintjes  Feb 20, 2000

(Signature) 
Prof. P.J Cilliers
		    
(Signature)
Postgraduate Committee Date



Introduction

A EEG based human - computer interface will be investigated. The system
must perform adequately within the constraints set by human ergonomics
and a minimum system performance specification.

Traditional techniques of measuring EEG signals involve lengthy and
inconvenient scalp surface preparations before EEG signal measurements
are attempted. Inadequate scalp preparation when using conventional
EEG electrodes frequently results in low quality or unusable
data. Electrodes must be chronic monitored and adjusted when
necessary which usually implies a re-calibration of the equipment as
well as data loss.

The inconvenience inherent in the conventional process of EEG signal
acquisition makes it unsuitable for a wide range of applications where
EEG derived data may be applied with good effect.

The areas in which a convenient user-friendly application of EEG based
technologies may be used covers a large spectrum of human - computer
interaction. This includes various applications in rehabilitation
engineering and interactive systems interfaces. An EEG-based human -
machine interface may provide a new communication and control modality
for people with severe motor disabilities. Replacing tradition input
mechanisms like keyboards, mice and touch screens opens up new avenues
in human computer interface design.


Overview of current literature 

Current literature on human - computer interfacing is concentrated in
the application and data interpretation arenas [1][2][4][5]. Few
sources mention the ergonomic aspect of the data acquisition hardware
employed. The literature does suggest various applications that can be
useful when testing the system in a chronic use scenario.  Polikoff
[1] suggests using the P300 as a base calibration measurement in
"Toward a P300-based Computer Interface". Work done by Kuno [3] in "A
Study toward EEG Applications: Event -related Potential from Posterior
Parietal Cortex" suggests that Posterior Pariental Cortex signals and
EOG's might be used as a calibration indicator.

The majority of work mentioned in the literature concerning electrical
brain - machine interfacing discusses micro-electrode
fabrication. Brief overviews of commercial work using active electrodes
for EMG measurements are also available.


Current state of research being done in the field.

Current research concentrates on the interpretation of data extracted
from EEG signals. Various mathematical models is being developed to
map measured signals to positions and events in the brain. Where work
is being done on the acquisition side it is concentrated on VLSI and
implant-able circuitry. There seems to be more activity in the
commercial sector specifically in the IT and gaming
industries. Technical information coming from companies doing work in
this arena is scarce and usually protected by copyright law.


Objective
Your specific objectives and goals with the research.

The goal of this project is to investigate and demonstrate the
feasibility of a user-friendly EEG-based computer interface. A
complete four channel EEG data acquisition and processing system will
be designed and implemented to this end.

The system will be shown to function adequately during chronic use
conditions. 

Proposed research 
Your approach to the problem and specific steps to follow. 

The proposed system will be modularly designed and implemented. Each
module will be capable of interfacing with commercially available data
acquisition or processing modules. 

The system will consist of various hard and software modules: data
acquisition, differential amplification, first stage filtering, data
transport, AD conversion, data processing and user feedback modules
are envisioned. The data acquisition module will be implemented using
active electrode technology. Other modules will be microprocessor and
PC based.


Contribution 
Your contribution in perspective with current knowledge in the field. 

Current procedures in EEG measurements dictates the use of
inconvenient and messy signal acquisition techniques. This work will
demonstrate the feasibility of using active electrode technology [8]
and computer based digital signal processing to produce EEG data of
equal or better quality.

The use of more user-friendly EEG data acquisition systems will
contribute to the advancement of human-computer interaction
technologies.

References 

1. Polikoff, J., Bunnell, H.T., and Borkowski, W. (1995). "Toward a
   P300-based Computer Interface." Proceedings of the RESNA '95 Annual
   Conference, RESNAPRESS, Arlington Va. pp 178-180. [html] [ps]

2. Makeig S, Enghoff S, Jung T-P, and Sejnowski TJ, "A Natural Basis
   for Efficient Brain-Actuated Control", IEEE Trans Rehab Eng, in press.

3. Kuno, Y., Yagi, T., Uchikawa, Y., A Study toward EEG Applications:
   Event -related Potential from Posterior Parietal Cortex, Proc.19th
   Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
   and Biology Society, 1551-1553, 1997.

4. Funase, A., Yagi, T., Kuno, Y., Uchikawa, Y., Fundamental research for
   EEG interface: EEG and auditory/visual stimulus during eye-movements,
   Proc. of 1999 IEEE Int. Conf. on systems, Man and Cybernetics, Vol.II,
   413-417, 1999.

5. Prosthetic Control by an EEG-based Brain-Computer Interface (BCI)
   Christoph Guger, Werner Harkam, Carin Hertnaes, Gert Pfurtscheller
   .Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Department of Medical
   Informatics 2Ludwig-Boltzmann Institute for Medical Informatics and
   Neuroinformatics .University of Technology Graz.

6. Cilliers & VanDerKouwe 1993 "A VEP-based Computer Interface for
   C2-Quadriplegics" Cilliers, P.J., and Van Der Kouwe, A.J.W., presented
   at 1993 IEEE Conference on Electronic Devices for the Disabled --
   Beyond 2000, Fall 1993.

7. The Brain-Computer Interface: Techniques for Controlling Machines.
   Richard H.C. Seabrook

8. Suzushi Nishimura Yutaka Tomita and Toshio Horiuchi. Clinical
   application of an ative electrode using an operational
   amplifier. IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering, bme -30(1)
   January 1984.


Contact Information 

M.J Meintjes
P.O Box 14484
Hatfield 
0028

Email   : thys@netsys.co.za
Work no.: (012) 348 4246
Work fax: (012) 348 4802
Cell no.: 082 3764 602
